----------------------- Page 1-----------------------

1      Appendix 

In analyzing visual data from multiple observers, the questions inevitably arise of 
which data to reject, and under what justiﬁcation, and whether combining data 
from  observers,  each  with  his  or  her  own  systematic  errors,  leads  to  a  biased 
result.  Without  instrumental  calibration,  there  is  no  certain  answer  to  these 
questions,  such  calibration  is  itself  problematic, 
and in any case is not available for the observations discussed here. 
    We  oﬀer a systematic approach to combining data from multiple  observers 
yielding a self-consistent consensus ﬁt.  In application to comet Hale-Bopp (Womack et al., in preparation), 
the  procedure  does  not  signiﬁcantly  aﬀect  the  grossest  measure,  namely  the 
slope  of magnitude  vs. log distance,  but,  applied to  data  already corrected to 
heliocentric distances and for phase, does reduce the  statistical error bars. 
    We assume three categories of errors: 

   1.  Every observer reports the brightness of an object on a scale that is shifted 
       up or down from other observers, but by the same number of magnitudes, 
       δobs,  independent  of  distance  or  brightness.   Without  instrumental  cali- 
       bration, we can best estimate δobs as that observer’s mean deviation from 
       a consensus ﬁt to the data (that is, an average). 

   2.  Some observers may have a slope bias, underestimating the brightness of 
       dimmer  objects  and overestimating those  of brighter ones,  or  vice-versa. 
       While it is diﬃcult to correct for such error without calibration, the bias 
       can  be  detected  (relative  to  the  consensus  ﬁt),  and  that  observer’s  data 
       discarded. 

   3.  Finally, some observers may have a great deal of scatter in their data but 
       no bias.  We can weight these observations less in ﬁts. 

1.1     Method 

We  seek  a  consensus  ﬁt  to  the  data. 
Hale-Bopp  exhibits  small  but  noticeable  deviations  from  a  power  law  (intensity  ∼ 
r−s) on time (distance) scales larger than any outbursts. In particular, nearly 

all  pre-perihelion  data  between  2  and  1  a.u.  suggest  a  negative  curvature  in 
the graph of magnitude against log distance (see figures in example_data).  A straight-line ﬁt 
would  penalize  observations that  report this  feature  accurately.      Based  on  the 
total number of apparent features between the closest (0.91 a.u.)            and furthest 
(8.15 a.u.)  observation, we ﬁt to ﬁfth-order polynomials.  The eﬀect, is to smooth the data. 

    The  deviations  between  an  observer’s  measurements  and  the  consensus  ﬁt 
at  the  same  distance  are  considered  noise.    The  set  of  all  such  deviations  by 
one observer deﬁnes the noise distribution for that observer, characterized by a 
mean δ_obs, variance σ2_obs     , skewness, excess kurtosis, etc. 
                    
    To  compute  the  self-consistent ﬁt,  we  iterate  the  following steps  until  con- 
vergence  to  a  fractional  tolerance  of  0.0001  (absolute  tolerance  if  any  ﬁtting 
parameter is less than 0.0001) of all six polynomial ﬁtting parameters: 

                                             1 

----------------------- Page 2-----------------------

Table 1:  Best-ﬁt slopes for pre-perihelion and post-perihelion obervations before 
and after corrections and the  self-consistent method  of this  appendix.         Lines 4 
and 5 use self-consistently shifted magnitudes and weight each observer’s data 
inversely as σobs, the variance of the noise.  The ﬁtting method reduces statistical 
error but does not signiﬁcantly alter the slope estimates. 

                                                   pre-perihelion     post-perihelion 
   1.  raw data                                    11.25    ±0.13     12.70    ±0.06 
   2.  heliocentric correction only                 8.01    ±0.05      9.17    ±0.07 
   3.  heliocentric and phase corrections           9.11    ±0.05      9.96    ±0.07 

   4.  self-consistent shifts                       9.19    ±0.02      9.88    ±0.03 
   5.  drop observers, self-consistent shifts       9.08    ±0.03      9.86    ±0.04 

   1.  We ﬁt a ﬁfth-order polynomial through all the data of the (possibly shifted) 
       magnitudes against log distance by the method of least squares (Legendre,    1803],
       weighting  each  observation  inversely  as  the  observer’s 
       variance  of  deviations,  σ2_obs    (Numerical Recipes). Initially,  the obs 
       magnitudes  have  been  corrected  to  heliocentric  distance  and  for  phase 
       but  have  not  been  shifted.        Also  initially,  the  weights 
       are all equal, because we do not know the distributions of deviations. 

   2.  Using the same data as in 1, we can also ﬁt a straight line, recovering the 
       slope  (power  law)  −s  and  statistical  error  bars  on  that  ﬁt  based  on  the 
       shifted, weighted data. 

   3.  For each observer, we consider the distribution of deviations between the 
       observations and the ﬁt at the given distance (i.e., in the graph, the verti- 
       cal vectors between data points and the polynomial ﬁt).  For each observer 
       separately, we treat the distribution as noise and estimate the mean, δobs, 
       and variance, σ2_obs 

   4.  For each observer separately, we shift all magnitudes by −δ_obs as computed 
       in 3. 

    For the present data set, these iterations converge to the speciﬁed tolerance 
after  between  nine  and  fourteen  iterations.    We  now  have  a  self-consistent  ﬁt 
and  set  of  shifted  data.  Row  4  of  Table  1.1  shows  small  changes  in  best-ﬁt 
slopes after the procedure.  As reﬂected in visibly smaller scatter, 
the statistical error ﬁtting to a straight line has been cut roughly in half.  Note 
that non-straight-line features in the consensus polynomial ﬁt limit how far the 
statistical error bars in a straight-line ﬁt can shrink. 
    The self-consistent procedure has eliminated the need to discard data arbi- 
trarily  ( e.g.,  points  more  than  some  number  of  standard  deviations  above  or 
below  a  consensus  ﬁt,  which  otherwise  would  throw  oﬀ  least-squares  ﬁts)  by 

                                            2 

----------------------- Page 3-----------------------

weighting points inversely as the observer’s variance.  However, as noted above, 
an  observer  whose  systematic  error  changes  with  brightness  would  still  aﬀect 
the slope adversely.  We can detect such a systematic problem by applying Stu- 
dent’s t-test to each observer’s data set, comparing the  diﬀerence  of the  mean 
deviation from the consensus ﬁt in the ﬁrst half of the observer’s data (sorted by 
distance) to the mean deviation in the second half.  Since the variances of the two 
halves may not be equal, we normalize by the “pooled variance” ([Numerical 
Recipes])  to  get an  approximate t-statistic.       Assuming  approximately Gaus- 
sian noise (not always justiﬁed), we calcluate the p  (probability) value that the 
t-statistic would be as large as observed or larger under the null hypothesis that 
ﬁrst and second halves of the data were drawn from the same distribution, i.e., 
that the observer did not contribute bias to the slope relative to the consensus. 
    For a p  value less than 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis and say that the 
observer  “fails”  the  t-test; that  is,  his  or  her  data  bias  the  slope. We  then 
discard such observers from the data set and repeat the self-consistent iteration 
(steps 1–4).  If repeating the t-test at the end of second set of iterations resulted 
in more observers failing the t-test, we would need to repeat the procedure until 
no  new  observers  were  discarded.     For  the  present  data  set,  no  new  observers 
failed the t-test after the second set of iterations. 
    As  shown  by  Line  5  of  Table  1.1,  throwing  out  observers  results  in  small 
changes  in  the  slopes.   For  the  pre-perihelion  data,  seven  observers  out  of  17 
were discarded, accounting for 449 of the original 1,045 data points.           For post- 
perihelion  data,  three  out  of  13  observers  were  discarded,  accounting  for  207 
out of the original 491 data points. 
    For  comet Hale-Bopp,  the  self-consistent  procedure  resulted  in  ad- 
justments to the slope roughly comparable to the original statistical error bars, 
while  cutting  these  approximately in half.     These  changes are far smaller than 
those associated with correcting for heliocentric distance and phase.  The obser- 
vations considered in the present work were taken by skilled amateurs calibrated 
by  eye  to  stars  in  generally  reliable  catalogues. Future  work  may  rely  on  less 
homogeneous amateur networks, in which case a self-consistent method for com- 
bining and weighting magnitudes, and discarding subsets with systematic slope 
bias, could prove useful. 

                                             3 
